Hello we'll welcome back to the course on databases.
Previously we performed the investigation of our current database structure and we found that out of
the two tables that we have we have the transactions table and the customers that well those are our
working tables.
We found that out of those two tables the Customers table is indeed in a third normal form.
So let's have a look at that one.
There it is.
And at the same time we found that the transactions table unfortunately isn't in a third normal form.
The problem here is that we've got two columns description and a retail price that depend on a candidate
key any candidate.
Q So this candidate here this one whichever one she is but as long as it's true for at least one candidate
key.
These columns depend on the candidate key transitively So even though before every single transaction
id there is indeed a specific description specific retail price and specific item the description actually
doesn't depend directly on the transaction ID.
It depends on the transaction ID through item.
So basically item that dictates description item Taser's scription and then item depends on transaction.
So the dependency is trans. it goes like this description through item depends on transaction id retail
price through item depends on transaction ID and that is sufficient to tell us that this table is not
in third normal form.
And basically what that means is that these two columns need to be separated out into their own table
a lookup table for items.
So basically that table just contained these three columns and then that the item column would be the
primary key in the table.
And here in this remaining table it would be the foreign key and then we would use this column to look
up the description and the retail price of each item.
So that is our goal and that's good news that we really know what needs to be done.
So basically now it's all up to us to just simply code this modification and adjust or alter our database
and turn it into a third normal form data structure.
So let's get straight into it.
All right.
The first thing that we want to do is we want to say that transitive dependencies needs to be separated
said.
Ted on a separate and into their own table.
So that's exactly what we're going to do.
Again to say select item out by the way just before we continue I wanted to say that what we're going
to be doing is going to be very similar.
The process is going to be very similar to what we did for the two and half parts so this parts were
done the check and then the separate columns through the team table then check and then remove the columns
then drop the team table so all of this part that we were done this what we're going to be doing now
is going to be very similar to that.
So if you feel confident after all the trials we've had to proceed on your own and create this little
exercise for ourselves then I highly encourage you to pause the video right now and go ahead and try
it on your own and try practicing this code will be a very good exercise.
And then you can always continue the video and compare your result to what I'm going to be presenting
in the rest of the story.
So on that note if you'd like to do that then go ahead and post the video.
Otherwise I'm going to continue and show you how I would go about solving this challenge and normalizing
this database.
All right.
Here we go.
So select star or rock star select want to select these three rights are on us like these.
Let's solve that let's say select item description that's put in brackets because it is a key word Komarr
retail price.
Right.
So there we go.
And we're the most like that from from transactions.
So if we were on this code we just select those three columns.
Now we want to put all of that as we know into a tempy file into tempy table.
Why is that.
Well because we don't want to put into the final table yet because there's lots of duplicates in here
life you'll see have a look let's have a look you'll probably will probably be able to pick some of
them up just by looking through here.
But it basically makes sense that people would buy the same items so they can see somebody bought this
dish towel which has this item code for forty nine dollars 50 and then again that was purchased again.
So this is going to be lots of duplicate in here.
It's a huge table.
Three thousand four and fifty five rows.
So we want to first put into a temp table and then we'll remove the pictures from there.
So there's go around that.
It's always good.
Well always good to copy this for as an audit trail how many rows were affected.
And then you want to select start from DMP just to check what you got.
And they basically duplicated here.
Here's another one.
The duplicates here are just a.
Because they are here because of the way we created this table.
And what we want we want to reduce this table to simply priceless so by removing the duplicates we'll
end up with a price where we have the item description the retail price.
Every single roll is going to be unique and that in essence is a priceless.
So here we want to do what you want to do.
We want to make the new table one enough so we want to make it put in first animal form.
We're going to remove duplicates right.
So that's the reason we want this table to eventually be third normal form as well.
So first step is to make it first on the form and that requires removing duplicates select distinct
star from you're from Tempe they'll take the distinct values and we want to put them into items that's
going to be our new table that's going to be a look up table.
OK 126.
You can see we kind of down from over 3000 to only 126 items.
I told them of items we have in our dataset.
All right.
So now let's check our table.
So let's say select star from items right.
So go ahead and do that for refresh here.
So basically the remaining tables that we're going to have our transactions items and customers right.
We were going to drop the tempy table and our organization table is not a working table that's just
the way we got the data set into skills serviced my Microsoft SQL Server.
And we rejected customers is indeed in third normal form so we are going to need to make sure that the
items and transactions tables are in third normal form.
So that's what we're going to start off with.
Now we're going to while we're here we're going to discuss the items table and make sure it's Ceridian
third normal form.
So we know that it's really in first of all form because we've just removed the duplicate values and
you can see that in every single row or in every single cell you only have one individual value.
So even though we have like slashes here or the ampersands and so on that's just the way this description
is structured it's not actually it's not two separate values that should be in separate rows.
So that's what we are looking for are there any values that actually should be separate not even separate
calls but separate rows.
And no we don't have any of those.
And also you can just assume that that's going to happen because of the way this database is designed
because of the purpose of this table.
So because the way this table gets populated whenever they have a new item they just put an item code
a description and a retail price into this table.
That's it.
So it's not possible or it's not intended for the stable to have two values in one cell.
All right so these tables and first normal form.
Now we need to check second normal form.
So for that we're going first need to identify the prime and non-prime attributes prime attributes are
the ones that are part of at least one candidate key non-prime attributes are not part of any candidate.
Q So what are our candidates here.
Well we've got the primary key here and by definition a primary key is a candidate.
So there we go there.
We have one.
And the question is is any are any of these or their combination a candidate key as well.
Well is description a candidate key well on its own description is not a candidate key because well
because two items different items can have the same description you can have different two different
hand-bags or two different t shirts and so on.
So that's not a candidate key retail price and thing two items can have the same price and be different
items.
Is the combination of the two a candidate key.
Well the combination of the two is not a candidate.
Q Why is that.
Well let's have a look this is actually an interesting question.
So let's say you've got let's find something interesting.
Let's say you have a blazer for 20 688.
Right.
So does a combination of the two uniquely identify that item that specific Blaser or more or more put
more blatantly if you have if this is an item that is a blazer for 2068 And then this is a different
item so the let's say can it be possible that the item is different but this is also Blaser and it's
also 26 88.
Right.
Is that possible.
Well yes that is possible you can have to Blazer's which are in fact two different Blazer's and they
have therefore two different items but they're both described as Blazer's because they are indeed lasers
and they're priced the same 26:18.
But at the same time the first place or might be from Hugo Boss and the second Blaser might be from
caliber orce or some other company.
And basically in essence there are two different Blazer's this might have different colors different
styles and so on but just happens so happens that they have the same price.
And that totally can happen.
And therefore these two together are not a candidate.
And one final comment.
Just to refresh on candidate keys the reason why we're not looking at considering the combination of
all three as a candidate key because it will not be a candidate key because a candidate key it will
be a super scheme.
But as a candidate key is a super key that you can break down further and because this is already a
candidate key.
So this cannot be a candidate key because part of it is already a candidate and means you can break
it down further.
So therefore we stop there and we know that this is a candidate key and none of these or their combination
is a candidate.
And what does that mean.
Well that means that this is all prime attribute and these are non-prime attributes good.
Now we can investigate second and third normal form.
So second normal form what does it say.
It says that if you remember the moment of Monnick it says that every non-prime attribute must state
a fact about the key the whole key and nothing but the key.
All right beautiful Monica I really like it because it helps remember so on the second on the part that
we're interested in is it states a fact about the whole key.
Right.
So basically it means that none or so that every single non-prime attribute has to be dependent fully
on the on the on each of the candidate keys.
We only have one candidate so that's easy.
And also our candidate key cannot be split into two or more columns because only contains one column
right.
This candidate only has one column.
So therefore by default this and this every single prime non-prime attribute is going to be dependent
wholly or fully on this kind of the key is simply because we can split it up.
So definitely this table is in second normal form.
And now let's proceed to third normal form and the definition of third normal form is the third part
of them and the Monnick that's every single non-prime attribute must specify a factor must provide a
fact about the key the whole key and nothing about the about nothing but the key.
So basically every non-prime attribute must be non-trans entirely dependent on the key.
Right on the on the candidate key on every candidate.
We only have one candidate key again.
And the question is so his description directly dependent on him or is a dependent either the retail
price no description is directly dependent on item.
And why is that.
Well because even if the price changes the description doesn't have to change.
You might have a coat for $135 a three and you can have a code for 93 tokenize So there is no link here.
There it is better.
QUESTION The next question is retail price directly dependent item or is it really depend on item through
description.
Well it's directly depend on item because you might have a house code for $135 a three and you could
have a blazer for $135 83.
It can totally happen that two items of different descriptions have the same retail price.
So therefore there is no link and retail price is directly dependent on item.
There we go.
So that means that there are no transitive dependencies of non-primary attributes on candidate keys
and therefore this table is in third normal form.
So here we can say three and half confirm.
Wonderful.
Okay.
So now the final step that we need to do is or nearer to final step is now we need to remove the extracted
rows from the Transactions table.
But at the same time as previously we need to keep the 14 foreign key item because that's the only way
we can interact with that table connected to a table so there's our transactions table.
We basically need to remove these columns these two columns because we have them in a separate table
now.
But we want to keep the item column because it's our only way to connect to that new table that we created
the items table.
So let's go ahead and do that.
There we go.
So we're going to say alter table transactions and then we're going to say drop column description.
So this is a key word so description and also we want to drop retail price we don't need brackets here.
We do need to underscore because it has an underscore.
If you didn't have the underscore then if I had a space we'd need the brackets.
OK.
So we want to do that.
Let's go ahead and drop it and then we're going to say select star from transactions
that should work.
There we go so now we have this table.
The question is is this table in third normal form.
Well we don't even need to check because we already know that the only two columns that are preventing
it from being in the third normal form have been removed.
So we've already performed this check we already know that the remaining part of this table is already
in third normal form.
So we can safely say that we've got three Neph confirmed here.
And finally the last step that we need to do is we need to drop table MP.
Always good to clean up after yourself.
So if you refresh there you'll see we've got customers items and transactions and for each one of them
if you go through your comments that's why it's good to put these comments because you can have a lot
of tables and then you will not know which is not remember which one you've looked at which we haven't.
So here we can see transaction's 3 and if confirmed check items 3 and confirm check and customers through
and have confirmed check.
So all of our three tables are in third normal form.
Therefore our database is in third normal form.
Congratulations.
We have normalized this database to sort of forum.
It has been a massive undertaking I can imagine when we went through it together so we we are looking
back we can see that it took quite a bit of time.
It's it's a heavy undertaking but it is totally worth it and is actually quite exciting.
I like thinking about these things like investigating I like them bringing taking action and taking
these databases to their normal form that is required.
I think it was very very fun.
I hope you think so too.
And so just to finish off basically we have these tables and now if you want to ever connect them you
have this transaction stable and if you want to get information on customers you just do a join like
a left join or in a join to the customers table.
Sure Fire information on the items you do adjoint the item so getting information reading formation
is a bit time consuming but on the other hand writing information is efficient and that is the difference
between oil AP databases which are designed for online analytics processing versus oil T.P. which are
designed for online transaction processing.
So here we are focusing on processing transactions so we want to make the writing process as simple
as possible to save to increase efficiency saves space and also minimize potential for errors.
The sacrifices of course will have to do Joines to get information out of it.
When we read it.
But that's how oil Topy databases work.
I hope you enjoyed this section and these tutorials and I can't wait to see you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.